Reservoir Computing as a Language Model
Felix Köster and Atsushi Uchida
Department of Information and Computer Sciences, Saitama University,
255 Shimo-Okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama City, Saitama, 338-8570, Japan ∗

arXiv:2507.15779v1 [cs.CL] 21 Jul 2025

(Dated: July 22, 2025)
Large Language Models (LLM) have dominated the science and media landscape duo to their
impressive performance on processing large chunks of data and produce human-like levels of text.
Nevertheless, their huge energy demand and slow processing still a bottleneck for further increasing
quality while also making the models accessible to everyone. To solve this bottleneck, we will
investigate how reservoir computing performs on natural text processing, which could enable fast and
energy efficient hardware implementations. Studies investigating the use of reservoir computing as
a language model remain sparse. In this paper, we compare three distinct approaches for characterlevel language modeling, two different reservoir computing approaches, where only an output layer is
trainable, and the well-known transformer -based architectures, which fully learn an attention-based
sequence representation. We explore the performance, computational cost and prediction accuracy
for both paradigms by equally varying the number of trainable parameters for all models. Using a
consistent pipeline for all three approaches, we demonstrate that transformers excel in prediction
quality, whereas reservoir computers remain highly efficient reducing the training and inference
speed. Furthermore, we investigate two types of reservoir computing: a traditional reservoir with
a static linear readout, and an attention-enhanced reservoir that dynamically adapts its output
weights via an attention mechanism. Our findings underline how these paradigms scale and offer
guidelines to balance resource constraints with performance.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Modern sequence modeling tasks, such as language
modeling and machine translation, have been dominated
by attention-based architectures-most prominently the
transformer family [1–6]- which excel at capturing longrange dependencies by learning contextual representations through self-attention layers and feed-forward networks. However, transformer training and inference incur
substantial computational and energy costs, often requiring specialized hardware and limiting accessibility with
tighter resource budgets.
Reservoir computing (RC) offers an alternative. In RC,
a large, fixed, recurrent “reservoir” projects inputs into
a high-dimensional state space, and only a lightweight
readout layer is trained. This design dramatically reduces training time and energy consumption and can be
implemented efficiently in software or on analog hardware substrates. Recent work has extended classical RC
with neural programming techniques to shape reservoir
dynamics and introduced attention mechanisms at the
readout stage to adaptively weight reservoir states [7].
RC has been shown to excel in time-series prediction [8–
10], capitalizing on the mentioned large, fixed random
reservoir for capturing nonlinear dynamics with minimal training overhead [11–14]. The charm of reservoir
computing lies in its versatile implementation via a wide
range of physical substrates [15], including quantum systems as potential RC candidates [16–18].
Recently, more expressive control over reservoir behavior has been introduced via neural programming

∗ felixk@mail.saitama-u.ac.jp, auchida@mail.saitama-u.ac.jp

paradigms, further expanding their utility in symbolic
computation and structured sequence modeling [19].
While prior work has explored the use of reservoir computing for text classification tasks [20] and even demonstrated hardware-oriented implementations for language
learning [21], the use of reservoir computing explicitly as
a language model—i.e., for generative next-token prediction—remains largely unexplored. Reservoir computing
has an advantage of simplicity, since only a small readout
layer must be trained, while transformers require endto-end training of embeddings, multi-head self-attention
layers, and feed-forward networks. However, transformers can achieve state-of-the-art performance in language
tasks by scaling to millions (or billions) of parameters [4].

In this study, we present a unified framework, applying
both approaches to character-level sequence prediction
on a small corpus of Shakespeare text inspired by recent
minimalist transformer implementations such as Karpathy’s NanoGPT [22], which demonstrate how compact
models can still achieve strong performance on characterlevel language modeling tasks. We vary reservoir size in
the classic RC for a linear readout and RC size and attention layer size for an attention-enhanced readout [7],
while varying hidden dimension and number of layers in
transformers, obtaining multiple configurations spanning
from thousands up to hundred thousand of trainable parameters. By measuring cross-entropy loss across these
diverse setups, we expose fundamental trade-offs in resource usage and generalization performance.

2
Input Text
s

a

h

Cross Entropy – Prediction
X
H(y, ŷ) = −
yi log ŷi

k

i

Output Layer
Vector Embedding

0.2
 . 
 .. 
0.8






0.3
 . 
 .. 
0.9

 
0.5
 . 
 .. 
0.6


w1
 w2 


 .. 
 . 
wm


 
0.7
 . 
 .. 
0.1

Reservoir
Att-Enhanced Reservoir
Transformer




pa = 0.1
pb = 0.01


pc = 0.12


..
.

Time

FIG. 1: Diagram illustrating the reservoir computing model with vector embedding, reservoir processing
(Att-Enhanced Reservoir, Transformer), output layer, and predicted probability vector for the next letter. The
vector embedding is trained for the transformer case, while being randomly initialized for the reservoirs.
The
P
predicted probabilities (e.g., pA for letter a) are used to compute the cross entropy loss H(y, ŷ) = − i yi log ŷi ,
which drives the error feedback.

II.

TASK FORMULATION AND DATASET

We tackle a character-level next-character prediction
task. Let X = {x1 , . . . , xT } represent a fixed-length input sequence of characters, and let yT +1 be the next character to predict. We treat the problem as a multi-class
classification over the vocabulary V = 59. The dataset
is a 9-million-character corpus of Shakespeare text inspired by recent minimalist transformer implementations
such as Karpathy’s NanoGPT [22], which we split into 6
shards: 5 shards for training and 1 shard for testing.
Each shard is processed at the character level, forming
sequences of length 32 for the input, plus the next character as the target. Before training the text corpus is preprocessed by lowercasing all letters to achieve a smaller
vocabulary V = 59. Training optimizes a standard crossentropy loss over the predicted logits versus the correct
next character. We track training and test losses per
shard and epoch.

III.

BACKGROUND AND MODEL
ARCHITECTURES

A.

Traditional Reservoir Computing

The echo state implementation of a classic reservoir
computer consists of three main components: an inputto-reservoir weight matrix Win ∈ RN ×d , a fixed recurrent reservoir matrix Wres ∈ RN ×N , and a readout layer
Wout ∈ RV×N [11]. Here d is the dimension of the chosen input-embedding vector for the input letter, N the
number of nodes in the reservoir, and V the size of the vocabulary. The reservoir evolves its hidden states rt ∈ RN

as
rt = tanh(rt−1 Wres + xt Win ).
Here, xt ∈ Rd is an embedding vector of the current input
character. In the simplest (traditional ) reservoir setting,
only the readout layer Wout is trained:
ȳt = rt Wout .
where rt is the reservoir state at time t. Typically,
Wout is learned using ridge regression, which minimizes
the mean squared error with an added ℓ2 regularization
term to prevent overfitting and improve generalization.
However, in our experiments, we employ a cross-entropy
loss function, necessitating gradient-based optimization
methods for training Wout . Moreover, ridge regression
can become computationally intensive as the number of
training samples and reservoir size increase, due to the inversion of large matrices. By using gradient-based methods, we circumvent these scalability issues.

B.

Attention-Enhanced Reservoir Computing

Incorporating an attention mechanism into a RC can
significantly improve its performance by making the output weights adaptable to the reservoir states, although
increasing the number of trainable weights relative to the
reservoir size [7]. Instead of using fixed output weights
as in traditional RC, the attention-enhanced reservoir
computing (AERC) uses dynamically computed attention weights that vary with inputs.
For each data point l fed into the reservoir, the corresponding attention weights Watt,l ∈ RHo ×N are calculated. These attention weights are derived using a small

3
TABLE I: Trainable Parameter Counts for the classic reservoir, AERC, and Transformer Architectures
Approach

Configuration
Parameters
Hidden Size dh = 64, Heads h = 4, Layers L = 4
15067
Hidden Size dh = 72, Heads h = 8, Layers L = 8
30299
Transformer Hidden Size dh = 128, Heads h = 8, Layers L = 8
45083
Hidden Size dh = 356, Heads h = 8, Layers L = 8
105275
Hidden Size dh = 256, Heads h = 16, Layers L = 16
155803
Reservoir Size N = 250
14809
Reservoir Size N = 500
29559
Reservoir
Reservoir Size N = 750
44309
Reservoir Size N = 1750
103309
Reservoir Size N = 2600
153459
Reservoir Size N = 75, Hidden Size H = 13
15464
Reservoir Size N = 75, Hidden Size H = 19
31124
Att Reservoir Reservoir Size N = 100, Hidden Size H = 20
45259
Reservoir Size N = 150, Hidden Size H = 25
102809
Reservoir Size N = 160, Hidden Size H = 30
155459

neural network F with trainable parameters Wnet , based
on the reservoir states rl :
Watt,l = F (Wnet , rl ).
The weights are used to project the reservoir state onto
a small hidden state rol ∈ RHo :
rol = Watt,l rl .
This intermediate output vector is then mapped onto
the final logits of dimensions V via a final linear matrix
Wout ∈ RV×Ho :
ȳl = Wout rol .
This choice of architecture with an intermediate layer is
done to reduce the number of parameters, resulting from
the 3-d tensor that maps from the attention layer in the
F (Wnet , rl ) to the attention weights Wnet mapping from
a vector to a matrix.
Our goal is to refine Wnet so that the AERC can effectively model complex temporal dependencies in the
input data. In this work, the neural network component
consists of a single hidden layer with a ReLU activation
function. After the training phase, the attention mechanism computes new attention weights at each time step.
These dynamically updated attention weights allow the
system to adapt to the evolving input, improving performance in complex dynamical systems.

C.

Transformer Architectures

Transformers [1] are fully trainable neural networks
that have achieve state-of-the-art performance on many
sequence modeling tasks. The input sequence of characters is mapped to embeddings of dimension d. A stack
of L layers follows, each containing a multi-head selfattention block and a feed-forward sub-block. Attention

heads learn to focus on relevant parts of the input sequence at different positions. The feed-forward layers,
typically parameterized by matrices of dimension on the
order of d × αd (where α is a constant expansion factor),
refine the representation. The complexity of the transformer grows with L (the number of layers) and d (the
embedding dimension). The output is passed through a
final projection to logits of size V, the vocabulary dimension. All parameters (including embedding, attention,
feed-forward, and output projection) are learned end-toend, giving transformers a large capacity to capture longrange dependencies. However, this capacity often comes
at a significant computational and memory cost, particularly for large L, d and long sequences.

IV.

ARCHITECTURES

The number of trainable parameters depends strongly
on the chosen architecture and hyperparameters. We focused on choosing hyperparameters, such that the number of trainable parameters is comparable between all
3 different models. Table I summarizes the number of
trainable parameters for each architecture across different configurations. With a vocabulary size of V = 59
characters due to the Shakespeare dataset used in our
experiments we arrive at architectures that range from
around 15000 trainable parameters to around 150000.
For all three models, we take an embedding dimension of
d = 16. For the Transformer model we vary the hidden
size dh , the number of heads h, and the number of layers
L. For the classic reservoir and AERC configurations, we
vary the reservoir size N , the hidden dimensions of the
attention layer H, and set the final layer Ho = H to be
equal to the attention layers hidden dimension.

4

Transformer

Reservoir

AERC

to be, or not clear
born have the poor
my turn with my soul.
romeo what when queen
let this shall let the
sbatter did the death,
well the part, that your
grief is turned, we hard
me, like on an i when a
true, and her-promain
the commone to with
you this lodged prithee

to be, or not as a find.
hele to where i wheress
thieve hot may come,
and you the sease, thy
agains for your gon.
pring thy worney that
light and he winder,
eyes was from three
like io be good reator,
but have them beenes
of be strengler. i have
such a foglingers widdly, good time i, btund.

to be, or not my
could now richment.
lodovico-ling, as yield
make one in their if
younger, farewell.
duchall, then, my great,
teater these is and
that beauty brow man,
for here is the lord of
play birthing on the
had your and, but
i’ll gench i heart that
this mans colors well

FIG. 2: Comparison of language models: Transformer, Reservoir, and AERC with around 155k parameters (biggest
model in Table I) run in auto-regressive mode with the initial seed ”to be, or not” showing the generated text.

V.

TRAINING

We train the parameters of all three architectures to
predict the next character in a sequence by minimizing
the cross-entropy loss:
(s+1)

Wnet


(s)
(s)
= Wnet − γ∇F Wnet , R/X ,

(1)

where s indexes the training batches, γ is the learning
rate, and in the two reservoir computer cases R denotes
the reservoir states and in the Transformer case X the
input sentence embedding. One batch corresponds to a
subset of the training data used in each update step. The
cross-entropy loss is defined as
H(y, ŷ) = −

V
X

yi log ŷi

(2)

i

where V is the number of output classes, ŷi are the output logits, and yi is the true one-hot encoded label. We
apply the softmax function to obtain output probabilities
and compute the cross-entropy loss accordingly, a standard formulation in classification tasks [23]. All trainable weights are updated using backpropagation [24] and
optimized using the Adam optimizer, a widely adopted
variant of stochastic gradient descent [25].

VI.

attention-enhanced reservoir, and the transformer models are trained entirely by backpropagation in a consistent framework. We measure cross-entropy on the test
shard as our main performance metric. We also assess
closed-loop generation by feeding the predicted character back as input, measuring distributional metrics and
repetitive patterns. Our parameter sweep includes varying the reservoir size or the neural network size in the attention reservoir, as well as varying the hidden dimension
d and number of layers and heads L in the transformer.
To save compute power, we first compute all the reservoir
responses in one shard and keep them in memory, after
which a few epochs on this shard are run before the next
shard is processed. This procedure is repeated multiple
times for all shards.

METHODOLOGY

We divide the Shakespeare corpus into 6 shards. Five
shards serve as training data, and one shard is used for
testing. We sample sequences of length 32, i.e. 32 characters as input, and train on a batch size of 1024 with Adam
at a learning rate 1 × 10−4 . The traditional reservoir, the

VII.

RESULTS

We now present the performance of the trained models and analyze the training process. Figure 2 shows a
representative example of text generated by each of the
three models, all configured with approximately 155,000
trainable parameters—corresponding to the largest models listed in Table I. While the generated text mimics the
style of the Shakespearean corpus, the limited model capacity and small vocabulary size lead to inconsistencies
and occasional errors. Nonetheless, the examples demonstrate that all three models successfully learn characterlevel prediction distributions that capture essential patterns in the dataset.
To quantitatively assess model performance, we report
training and testing losses across epochs and data shards
for all five model sizes described in Table I. The results
are visualized in Figure 3. Figure 3 presents training (top

5

Transformer Training

Train Loss

3.0
2.5

Att Training

Parameter:14809
Parameter:29559
Parameter:44309
Parameter:103309
Parameter:153459

Parameter:15464
Parameter:31124
Parameter:45259
Parameter:102809
Parameter:150659

2.0
1.5

Test Loss

Reservoir Training

Parameter:15067
Parameter:30299
Parameter:45083
Parameter:105275
Parameter:155803

100

2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6 100

101
102
Accumulated Shard Epochs
Transformer Testing

100

101
102
Accumulated Shard Epochs
Reservoir Testing

100

101
102
Accumulated Shard Epochs
Att Testing

101
102
Accumulated Shard Epochs

100

101
102
Accumulated Shard Epochs

100

101
102
Accumulated Shard Epochs

FIG. 3: Training and testing loss over accumulated number of shared epochs for the Transformer, Reservoir, and
Attention-Enhanced Reservoir Computer for the 5 different complexity models of Table I. The thin light-grey
dashed vertical lines indicate a shard change, while the black dashed lines show one complete epoch of all shards.
Every shard was run for 5 shard epochs until the next one was processed.

row) and testing (bottom row) losses for the five model
sizes listed in Table I, ordered from smallest (turquoise)
to largest (grey). Model sizes range from approximately
15,000 to 155,000 trainable parameters.
Training is performed in shards: for each shard, reservoir responses are precomputed and stored in memory.
Multiple training epochs are then performed on each
shard before proceeding to the next. This approach
mimics the inherent speed of reservoir computing, which
theoretically operates with near-instantaneous dynamics.
Vertical light-gray dashed lines mark shard transitions,
while thicker dark-gray dashed lines denote full passes
over the dataset (epochs). Due to this sharding structure,
we observe periodic spikes in both training and testing
losses—particularly in training—caused by model finetuning on individual shards. While increased stochasticity might reduce overfitting and improve convergence
by avoiding poor local minima, our configuration of six
shards and five epochs per shard balances computational
efficiency and generalization. This setup tries to maximize the benefits of precomputing reservoir states while
mitigating overfitting through moderate stochasticity.
Analyzing the loss curves for the Transformer, the
classical Reservoir Computer (RC), and the AttentionEnhanced Reservoir Computer (AERC), we observe that
loss variance across different model sizes is more pronounced in the RC and AERC than in the Transformer.
As expected, the Transformer achieves the best overall

performance, with a minimum test loss of 1.67 for the
largest configuration. However, we note that the classical RC achieves a test loss as low as 2.01, and the AERC
reaches an intermediate value of 1.73—indicating that
both RC-based models are competitive despite their relative simplicity.
Finally, the Transformer exhibits the smallest training–testing loss gap, reflecting better generalization and
reduced overfitting. In contrast, both reservoir-based
models show a greater tendency to overfit, likely due to
the fixed nature of their reservoirs and the limited capacity of their readout layers.
An important direction for further research is to investigate scaling laws for reservoir computing in the context
of large language model (LLM) prediction. These results
would be consistent with known scaling laws of transformer architectures, where performance improves predictability with increased model size and dataset scale
[26]. Understanding how performance scales with reservoir size and model capacity could offer valuable insights
into the potential of RC-based architectures in more complex sequence modeling tasks. As computational resources improve, we plan to explore the behavior of both
classical and attention-enhanced reservoir computers at
larger scales, assessing their viability as alternatives to
conventional deep learning models.

6
Evaluation Metrics and Analysis

Next we investigate the long-term text similarity performance of the three architectures for auto-regressive
generation. To assess the performance of the different
model architectures in generating longer text, we employ
the N-gram overlap to quantify performance beyond the
loss of cross entropy. This metric quantifies the aspect of
similarity to the reference data and distributional alignment and is inspired by classical N-gram-based evaluation metrics such as BLEU [27], which assess the proportion of overlapping sequences between generated and
reference text. The following subsection details the metric.

1.

N -gram Overlap measures the similarity between
the generated text and a reference text by computing
the fraction of unique n-grams in the generated text that
also appear in the reference text.
|{n ∈ Gn ∩ Rn }|
,
|Gn |

(3)

where Gn is the set of unique n-grams in the generated
text, and Rn is the set of unique n-grams in the reference
(test) text.

2.

Transformer

Reservoir

Att-Enhanced

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.3
15k 30k 45k

100k
Model Complexity

150k

FIG. 4: 7-gram and 8-gram overlap for the Transformer,
Reservoir, and Attention-Enhanced Reservoir Computer
over the number of trainable parameters.

N-gram Overlap

Overlap-n =

8-gram Overlap 7-gram Overlap

A.

Mathematical Formulation

Given a generated text G = {g1 , g2 , . . . , gM } and the
reference text R = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rN } we extracted the ngrams as:
Gn = {(gi , gi+1 , . . . , gi+n−1 ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ M − n + 1} ,

the classic reservoir approach tends to have the lowest
overlap and thus the lowest generalization. Transformers and Attention-Enhanced Reservoirs demonstrate on
par diversity and distributional alignment, making them
well-suited for tasks like text generation. Their ability
to maintain high performance underscores their superior
performance, due to the inclusion of neural networks.
The traditional reservoir, though the simplest, can
struggle with capturing complex dependencies and maintaining distributional alignment, as evidenced by its
lower distinct-n scores. However, its simplicity remains
valuable in scenarios where an easy hardware implementation is prioritized.
The attention-enhanced reservoir improves upon the
traditional model by incorporating dynamic readout
weights, thereby enhancing its ability to capture more
complex patterns without incurring the full computational burden of transformers. This architecture serves as
a middle ground, offering improved performance over the
traditional reservoir, while offering reducing complexity
in the neural network architecture.

Rn = {(rj , rj+1 , . . . , rj+n−1 ) | 1 ≤ j ≤ N − n + 1} .
The overlap-n metric is then given by:
|Gn ∩ Rn |
Overlap-n =
.
|Gn |
This metric assesses how well the model captures the ngram patterns present in the reference data. A higher
overlap indicates that the generated text shares more
common sequences with the reference, suggesting better
generalization to the learned patterns.

B.

N -Gram Similarity

The results of the 7-gram and 8-gram performance are
shown in Fig. 4. The evaluation metrics reveal that

C.

Inference Time Comparison

As a final performance metric, we evaluate the training and inference time costs for all three model architectures. Figure 5 displays the time (in seconds) required for
both training and inference, plotted against the number
of trainable parameters in each model. Inference time
refers to generating a sequence over a fixed data chunk
or producing longer text samples.
Notably, we exclude the computational cost of the
reservoir dynamics themselves. We assume that the
reservoir computation can be offloaded to physical substrates such as photonic circuits, which have been experimentally shown to operate at extremely high speeds
[28]. Such hardware would operate at time scales several

7

80

Training and Inference Time vs Model Complexity
01

3.27e+

Time (sec)

60
40

Model Groups & Line Styles
Att Reservoir
Reservoir
Transformer 16.0 heads
Transformer 4.0 heads
Transformer 8.0 heads
Training Time
Inference Time

01

1.62e+

20
0

00
8.30e+

0

3.08e+00

-6.53e-02

100k 200k 300k 400k 500k
Number of Trainable Parameters

FIG. 5: Training and inference time for a longer text generation over the number of trainable parameters for the
Transformer, Reservoir, and Attention-Enhanced Reservoir Computer. The numbers above the line are from a fit
applied via y = α log10 (x), where x is the number of trainable parameters, y is the training time and α the slope.

orders of magnitude faster than the subsequent postprocessing by the trained layers, justifying its omission in
this comparison.
In Figure 5, solid lines indicate training time, while
dashed lines represent inference time. The color scheme
distinguishes between the three model types: classic
reservoir (blue), attention-enhanced reservoir (orange),
and transformer (green, red, and purple). It is evident
that reservoir-based models exhibit substantially lower
computational times, and their scalability with respect
to parameter count is more favorable than that of transformers. The numbers above the line are from a fit
applied via y = α log10 (x), where x is the number of
trainable parameters, y is the training time and α the
slope. From the graphs itself and the slope α we can
see that reservoir based training and inference time is by
magnitudes of order faster. This performance advantage
arises because the reservoir handles the computationally
expensive sequence processing, whereas in transformers,
attention mechanisms scale quadratically with sequence
length. These results suggest that using a reservoir for
data preprocessing can significantly accelerate language
model performance without incurring the high time cost
associated with full transformer architectures.

attention-enhanced reservoir (with a dynamic readout),
and transformer architectures on a character-level Shakespeare corpus. By systematically varying model sizes
and measuring cross-entropy, N-gram Overlap, and time
costs, we revealed how each architecture scales in performance and resource usage. Transformers excel overall,
solidifying their state-of-the-art machine learning status,
though they are more demanding in terms of computation time due to the quadratic complexity of the sequence length. Traditional reservoirs, while limited in
their ability to capture complex dependencies, show surprising good results for their simple buildup. Attentionenhanced reservoirs strike a balance between efficiency
and performance, outperforming traditional reservoirs
and even getting close to the performance of Transformer
models while having a negotiable complexity depending
on the sequence length.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
VIII.

CONCLUSION

We presented a unified framework for comparing classical reservoir computing (with a static linear readout), an

This study was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI (JP22H05195, JP25H01129) and JST CREST (JPMJCR24R2) in Japan.

8

[1] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit,
L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762
(2017).
[2] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (2019) pp. 4171–4186.
[3] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and
I. Sutskever, Improving language understanding by generative pre-training, Tech. Rep. (OpenAI, 2018).
[4] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry,
A. Askell, et al., Language models are few-shot learners,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 (2020).
[5] T. Schick and H. Schütze, It’s not just size that matters:
Small language models are also few-shot learners, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2009.07118 (2020).
[6] T. Gao, A. Fisch, and D. Chen, Making pre-trained language models better few-shot learners, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.15723 (2020).
[7] F. Köster, K. Kanno, J. Ohkubo, and A. Uchida,
Attention-enhanced reservoir computing, Physical Review Applied 22, 014039 (2024).
[8] H. Jaeger and H. Haas, Harnessing nonlinearity: Predicting chaotic systems and saving energy in wireless communication, Science 304, 78 (2004).
[9] J. Pathak, B. R. Hunt, M. Girvan, Z. Lu, and E. Ott,
Model-free prediction of large spatiotemporally chaotic
systems from data: A reservoir computing approach,
Physical Review Letters 120, 024102 (2018).
[10] S. Krishnagopal, M. Girvan, E. Ott, and B. R. Hunt, Separation of chaotic signals by reservoir computing, Chaos
30, 013118 (2020).
[11] H. Jaeger, The “echo state” approach to analysing and
training recurrent neural networks, Tech. Rep. 148 (German National Research Center for Information Technology GMD, 2001).
[12] M. Lukoševičius and H. Jaeger, Reservoir computing approaches to recurrent neural network training, Computer
Science Review 3, 127 (2009).
[13] W. Maass, T. Natschläger, and H. Markram, Real-time
computing without stable states: A new framework for
neural computation based on perturbations, Neural Computation 14, 2531 (2002).
[14] B. Schrauwen, D. Verstraeten, and J. Van Campenhout,
An overview of reservoir computing: theory, applications

and implementations, in Proceedings of the 15th European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks (ESANN)
(2007) pp. 471–482.
[15] C. Fernando and S. Sojakka, Pattern recognition in
a bucket, in International Conference on Cellular Automata (Springer, 2003) pp. 588–597.
[16] S. Ghosh, A. Opala, M. Matuszewski, T. Paterek, and
T. C. Liew, Quantum reservoir processing, npj Quantum
Information 5, 1 (2019).
[17] M. Negoro, K. Mitarai, K. Fujii, K. Nakajima, and
M. Kitagawa, Machine learning with controllable quantum dynamics of a nuclear spin ensemble in a solid, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.02841 (2018).
[18] J. Chen, H. Nurdin, and N. Yamamoto, Temporal information processing on noisy quantum computers, Physical
Review Applied 14, 064075 (2020).
[19] J. Z. Kim and D. S. Bassett, A neural programming
language for the reservoir computer, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.05032 (2022).
[20] N. Schaetti, Behaviors of reservoir computing models for
textual documents classification, in 2019 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) (IEEE,
2019) pp. 1–7.
[21] L. Sun, Z. Wang, J. Jiang, Y. Kim, B. Joo, S. Zheng,
S. Lee, W. J. Yu, B.-S. Kong, and H. Yang, Insensor reservoir computing for language learning via twodimensional memristors, Science Advances 7, eabg1455
(2021).
[22] A. Karpathy, Nanogpt, https://github.com/karpathy/
nanoGPT (2022).
[23] C. M. Bishop, Pattern recognition and machine learning
(Springer, 2006).
[24] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams,
Learning representations by back-propagating errors, Nature 323, 533 (1986).
[25] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization, International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2015), arXiv:1412.6980 [cs.LG].
[26] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown,
B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and
D. Amodei, Scaling laws for neural language models,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 (2020).
[27] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, Bleu:
a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation, in Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL, 2002)
pp. 311–318.
[28] K. Vandoorne et al., Experimental demonstration of
reservoir computing on a silicon photonics chip, Nature
Communications 5, 3541 (2014).

